[docs] Update reconfigurator ops guide (#10586)
oxidecomputer/omicron: docs/reconfigurator-ops-guide.adoc

MGS updates (e.g., SP updates) may be skipped if the new target release specifies the same versions for these components that are already deployed.  This is common in development/test environments, though unexpected in customer environments.  All releases, even development ones, have new versions of the host OS and control plane zones so these are never skipped.

> === Verifying that everything is working okay before the update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Verifying that the system is ready for upgrade
```

(trying to avoid saying "everything is working okay")

How about including an example CLI invocation and the output here?

Author: Fair, tbh I was just copying what the other headers said. I'll probably keep "update" though. The other headers say:

```
=== Verifying that everything is working okay during the update
```

```
=== Verifying that everything is working okay after the update
```

So, it'd be strange to say upgrade in the first one no?

Reviewer: Agreed -- that was my mistake.  What I was trying to change was "everything is working okay" to "the system is ready for ... ".  The new version looks good!

* no new blueprints should be created
* all components should be at the new version

> * about 15-20 minutes after the update is finished, check the system update status endpoint, or the console view of "System Update" to see if the response is telling the user they should call support.

Reviewer: You shouldn't have to wait this long, right?  I would expect that if the update is complete, the system should immediately report any remaining problems, and that we wouldn't expect any.

I'd suggest:

- create a subsection of section 3 ("Collecting data from Reconfigurator") called "Task: check for `contact_support` flag" or something like that.  That should include an example CLI invocation and maybe a screenshot from the console?
- The earlier section (on verifying things are okay before the update) can basically be 1-2 sentences like "Use <link to the other section> to verify that `contact_support` is false.  If it's true, use <<link>> to resolve that before starting an update."
- This section can just have the same 1-2 sentences and links.

I suggest this so that we clearly document the procedure with an example without having to duplicate it twice (even though it's pretty simple).

Author: I already have a "task-check-cause-of-contact-support-true" task, it could be confusing to have another one? I can add more information to it though.

> You shouldn't have to wait this long, right? I would expect that if the update is complete, the system should immediately report any remaining problems, and that we wouldn't expect any.

Don't inventory collections run on a 10 minute interval? If we check immediately, there could be some false positives no?

Author: Ok, I restructured this. let me know what you think!

Reviewer: The system does more frequent inventory collections when it has reason to think anything has changed, which includes any time a blueprint is executed:
https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/blob/9f1029da32f20ace5ef9aaa61ad610ea6e9db3c7/nexus/src/app/background/init.rs#L544
(the inventory collector is defined with `rx_blueprint_exec` as a watcher, meaning that the collector will be activated whenever that channel's value changes, which happens when blueprint execution finishes).

|===

[#task-check-cause-of-contact-support-true]
=== Task: Checking why the contact support field in system update status is true

> Every time the system update status endpoint is called and the `contact_support` boolean is true, the results of the failed health checks will be captured in the logs.

Reviewer: I'd open with more context, like:

```suggestion
Every time the "system update status" endpoint is called, the system checks for a small set of known issues.  If any are found, it reports `contact_support: true`.

Prior to the update, this flag indicates issues that could prevent an update from proceeding normally.
During the update, this flag indicates that the update has stopped and requires support intervention to continue.
After the update, this flag indicates that the update may have resulted in a system that's not fully working.

The API doesn't say anything else because this isn't customer-actionable.  Details are available in the Nexus log that serviced the API request.
```

    local_addr = 127.0.0.1:12220
    method = GET
    remote_addr = 127.0.0.1:61900
    req_id = 9ed1b600-1963-4691-b400-2a78c0cea4ba
    silo_id = 980314eb-2969-4a13-b407-be9f3d93d330
    silo_user_id = 41278141-e86f-41e8-b398-b0310a62d0ca
    stale_inventory_collection_time_done = 2026-05-11T07:13:58.399541007Z
    stuck_sagas = [StuckSaga { id: SagaId(1f0d13c3-6c81-43d0-b4ae-7c74e0ec45ef), name: "test stuck saga" }, StuckSaga { id: SagaId(f59a5b82-be73-4b04-9e7d-6d252663f605), name: "test stuck saga" }]
    stuck_update_time_last_step_planned = 2026-05-11T07:03:58.399545477Z
    type = silo_user
    unhealthy_zpools_by_sled = {1cd22575-85e2-471d-88fd-3ec5c5e61ed6 (sled): [Zpool { time_collected: 2026-05-11T07:34:08.063086Z, id: b5383b08-68bf-4653-bb55-6bd1ff601d1b (zpool), total_size: ByteCount(1048576), health: Degraded }]}
    uri = /v1/system/update/status
```

A few things to note:

> - If you call the update status endpoint during an update, the health checks won't run and no problems will be reported (unless the system considers an update to be stuck).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you call the update status endpoint during an update, the health checks won't run and no problems will be reported unless the system considers an update to be stuck.
```

> - The health checks will run during a MUPdate so the endpoint may show false positives if an MUPdate is happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The health checks will run during a MUPdate so the endpoint may show false positives if a MUPdate is happening.
```

|===

[#task-check-for-contact-support-flag]
=== Task: Check for contact_support flag

> NOTE: This field is intended for update purposes only. It flags whether it is safe to start an update, an update has stopped unexpectedly, or whether health checks on a subset of components passed after an update completed. It is NOT a health status API. If used as a health status API, it could show false positives. For example, a newly commissioned sled that hasn't reported a reconciliation result yet would set the contact_support field to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: This field is intended for update purposes only. It flags whether it is safe to start an update, an update has stopped unexpectedly, or whether health checks on a subset of components passed after an update completed. It is NOT a health status API. If used as a health status API, it could show false positives and false negatives. For example, a newly commissioned sled that hasn't reported a reconciliation result yet would set the contact_support field to true.  And many potential problems in the system are _not_ checked in computing this flag.
```

    local_addr = 127.0.0.1:12220
    method = GET
    remote_addr = 127.0.0.1:61900
    req_id = 9ed1b600-1963-4691-b400-2a78c0cea4ba
    silo_id = 980314eb-2969-4a13-b407-be9f3d93d330
    silo_user_id = 41278141-e86f-41e8-b398-b0310a62d0ca
    stale_inventory_collection_time_done = 2026-05-11T07:13:58.399541007Z
    stuck_sagas = [StuckSaga { id: SagaId(1f0d13c3-6c81-43d0-b4ae-7c74e0ec45ef), name: "test stuck saga" }, StuckSaga { id: SagaId(f59a5b82-be73-4b04-9e7d-6d252663f605), name: "test stuck saga" }]
    stuck_update_time_last_step_planned = 2026-05-11T07:03:58.399545477Z
    type = silo_user
    unhealthy_zpools_by_sled = {1cd22575-85e2-471d-88fd-3ec5c5e61ed6 (sled): [Zpool { time_collected: 2026-05-11T07:34:08.063086Z, id: b5383b08-68bf-4653-bb55-6bd1ff601d1b (zpool), total_size: ByteCount(1048576), health: Degraded }]}
    uri = /v1/system/update/status
```

A few things to note:

- If you call the update status endpoint during an update, the health checks won't run and no problems will be reported unless the system considers an update to be stuck.

> - The health checks will run during a MUPdate so the endpoint may show false positives if a MUPdate is happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are many conditions outside the context of a self-service update that can transiently cause `contact_support: true`, such as when a sled is rebooting or a MUPdate is in progress.  This flag should only be used to determine if it's okay to proceed with a self-service update, if a self-service update is stuck, or if a self-service update appears to have introduced a serious problem.
```
